New tutorials on earthworking (#83)
OSGeo/grass-tutorials: content/tutorials/earthworks/basics.qmd

---

> title: "Basic earthworks"

Reviewer: Perhaps standardize the titles so it's clear they are related, e.g. Terrain modeling with r.earthworks: Basics

Reviewer: I think Terrain modeling is rather general, so I would prefer r.earthworks: ... since it's very specific to it.

I can't tell what would be best for the noise tutorial, but it can be always linked from the r.earthworks tutorials but be standalone.

i.e. high points and low points. 
These extrema can be set with coordinates, rasters, vector points, or vector lines.
In GRASS raster and vector data can be drawn with the
{{< meta links.wxgui_rdigit >}} and
{{< meta links.wxgui_vdigit >}}.
Transformations are a function of 
the existing elevation, 
change in vertical distance, 
and change in slope over horizontal distance. 
Vertical distance is calculated as the difference between 
proposed local extrema and a topographic datum, 
while change in slope is a function of growth and decay 
applied to horizontal change in distance.
This tutorial covers:

* Cut operations
* Fill operations
* Cut & fill operations
* Random operations

::: {.callout-note title="Computational notebook"}
This tutorial can be run as a 
[computational notebook](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/earthworks/basics.ipynb).
Learn how to work with notebooks with the tutorial
[Get started with GRASS & Python in Jupyter Notebooks](./get_started/fast_track_grass_and_python.qmd).
:::

# Setup

## Project

Start a GRASS session in a new project
with a Cartesian (XY) coordinate system.

::: {.panel-tabset group="language"}

## Command line

> ```{bash}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{bash}
grass --tmp-project XY
```

{{< meta links.g_extension >}}. 

::: {.panel-tabset group="language"}

## Command line

```{bash}
g.extension extension=r.earthworks
```

## Python

```{python}
# Install extension
gs.run_command("g.extension", extension="r.earthworks")
```

:::

## Region

Use {{< meta links.g_region >}}
to set the extent and resolution of the computational region.
Create a region starting at the origin
and extending two hundred units north and eight hundred units east.
Use the raster calculator {{< meta links.r_mapcalc >}}
to generate a flat terrain
with an constant elevation of zero.

::: {.panel-tabset group="language"}

## Command line

```{bash}
g.region n=200 e=800 s=0 w=0 res=1
r.mapcalc expression="elevation = 0"
```

## Python

```{python}
# Set region
gs.run_command("g.region", n=200, e=800, s=0, w=0, res=1)

# Generate base elevation
gs.mapcalc("elevation = 0")
```

:::

![Constant base elevation](images/basics_01.webp)

# Fill Operations

Use a fill operation to model a peak 
from a set of x- and y-coordinates
with {{< meta links.r_earthworks >}}. 
These coordinates represents a local topographic maxima, 
i.e. a high point.
The algorithm will fill locally up to that point,

> then the slopes will falloff at a given rate of decay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then the slopes will fall off at a given rate of decay.
```
